                                                              Trajectory balance:
                                                    Improved credit assignment in GFlowNets


                                                      Esmeralda S. Whitammer                                Moksh Jain
                                                      Mila, Université de Montréal                   Mila, Université de Montréal
                                                       Montréal, Québec, Canada                       Montréal, Québec, Canada




arXiv:2201.13259v4 [cs.LG] 28 Aug 2026
                                                           Emmanuel Bengio                                     Chen Sun
                                                    Mila, McGill University, Recursion                 Mila, Université de Montréal
                                                        Montréal, Québec, Canada                        Montréal, Québec, Canada

                                                                                    Yoshua Bengio
                                                                              Mila, Université de Montréal
                                                                               Montréal, Québec, Canada
                                                   {esmeralda.whitammer,moksh.jain,chen.sun,yoshua.bengio}@mila.quebec
                                                                   emmanuel.bengio@recursionpharma.com



                                                                                       Abstract
                                                  Generative flow networks (GFlowNets) are a method for learning a stochastic
                                                  policy for generating compositional objects, such as graphs or strings, from a
                                                  given unnormalized density by sequences of actions, where many possible action
                                                  sequences may lead to the same object. We find previously proposed learning
                                                  objectives for GFlowNets, flow matching and detailed balance, which are analogous
                                                  to temporal difference learning, to be prone to inefficient credit propagation across
                                                  long action sequences. We thus propose a new learning objective for GFlowNets,
                                                  trajectory balance, as a more efficient alternative to previously used objectives.
                                                  We prove that any global minimizer of the trajectory balance objective can define
                                                  a policy that samples exactly from the target distribution. In experiments on
                                                  four distinct domains, we empirically demonstrate the benefits of the trajectory
                                                  balance objective for GFlowNet convergence, diversity of generated samples, and
                                                  robustness to long action sequences and large action spaces.


                                         1   Introduction
                                         Generative flow networks [GFlowNets; 3, 4] are models that exploit generalizable structure in an
                                         energy function E to amortize sampling from the corresponding probability density function on a
                                         space of compositional objects X , for example, graphs composed of nodes and edges. A GFlowNet
                                         learns a stochastic policy that generates such structured objects by producing a stochastic sequence of
                                         actions that incrementally modify a partial object (state), e.g., by adding an edge or a node to a graph,
                                         starting from a universal initial state (like an empty graph). A special ‘exit’ action signals that the
                                         construction of the object x ∈ X is completed, and the policy is trained so as to make the likelihood
                                         of generating x proportional to the given unnormalized probability or reward R(x) = e−E(x) .
                                         Like other models in deep reinforcement learning [RL; 25], GFlowNets are trained with a parametric
                                         policy that can be given desired inductive biases (e.g., a particular deep net architecture) and allows
                                         generalization to states not seen in training. Natural domains for applying GFlowNets are those
                                         where exact sampling is intractable and local exploration (MCMC) methods perform poorly, but

                                         36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
diversity of samples is desired [3, 32, 14, 8]. For example, GFlowNets have been used [3] to generate
graphical descriptions of molecules by incremental addition of simple building blocks, where the
reward R(x) is the estimated strength of binding the constructed molecule to a protein target: the
number of candidates grows rapidly with the molecule size and the reward has many separated modes.
Like all RL models that iteratively sample action sequences for training, GFlowNets pose the learning
challenges of exploration/exploitation and credit assignment, i.e., propagation of a reward signal over
an action sequence [27, 2, 17]. The efficiency of credit assignment and training in GFlowNets is the
focus of the present paper.
The learning problem solved by GFlowNets also has two fundamental differences with the standard
reward-maximization paradigm of RL. First, a GFlowNet aims to make the likelihood of reaching a
terminating state proportional to the reward, not to concentrate it at a maximal-reward state. Thus, a
GFlowNet must model the diversity in the target distribution, not only its dominant mode. Reward
maximization in RL can be turned into sampling proportionally to the reward with appropriate entropy
maximization regularization, if there is only one way to reach every state [3]. The second difference
with reward-maximization in RL is indeed that the GFlowNet training objectives still lead to correct
sampling even when multiple action sequences lead to the same terminating state. Note that the
likelihood of reaching a state is the sum of likelihoods of all action sequences leading to it, and that
the number of such paths may be exponential in their length.
The set of all achievable sequences of actions and states can be conceptually organized in a directed
graph G = (S, A) in which the vertices S are states (some of them designated as terminal states, in
bijection with X ) and the edges u→v in A each correspond to applying an action while in a state
u ∈ S and landing in state v. In [3], a GFlowNet is described by a nonnegative function on the
edges, called the edge flow F : A → R≥0 , where F (u→v) is an unnormalized likelihood of taking
the action that modifies state u to state
                                     P v. The GFlowNet policy samples the transition u→v from
state u with probability F (u→v)/ v′ F (u→v ′ ) where the denominator sums over the outgoing
edges from u. By analogy with the classical notion of flows in networks [9], one can think of this
flow like the amount of water flowing through an edge (like a pipe) or a state (like a tee, where pipes
meet). It is shown that this GFlowNet policy samples x proportionally to R(x) if F satisfies a set of
linear flow matching constraints (a conservation law: the sum of flows into a state should equal the
sum of flows out of it). These constraints are converted into a temporal difference-like objective that
can be optimized with respect to the parameters of a neural net that approximates F . An alternative
objective based on detailed balance constraints was proposed in [4]. These objectives, however, like
temporal-difference learning, can suffer from slow credit assignment [27, 2, 17].
The main contribution of this work (§3) is a new parametrization and objective for GFlowNets.
This objective, which we call trajectory balance, is computed on sampled full action sequences
(trajectories) from the initial state to a terminal state, unlike the flow matching and detailed balance
objectives. We prove that global minimization of trajectory balance implies that the learned action
policy samples proportionally to R. We also empirically show that the trajectory balance objective
accelerates training convergence relative to previously proposed objectives, improves the learned
sampling policy with respect to metrics of diversity and divergence from the reward function, and
allows learning GFlowNets that generate sequences far longer than was possible before. As a
secondary contribution, we perform the first empirical validation of the detailed balance training
objective. Comparative evaluation of the three GFlowNet objectives and non-GFlowNet baselines is
performed on four domains illustrating different features of the reward landscape:
• Hypergrid (§5.1), an illustrative synthetic environment with modes separated by wide troughs;
• Molecule synthesis (§5.2), a practical graph generation problem, where the trajectory balance
  objective leads to significant computational speed-ups and more diverse generated candidates;
• Sequence generation (§5.3), where we show the robustness of trajectory balance to large action
  spaces and long action sequences on synthetic data and real AMP sequence data.
Since the initial appearance of this work on arXiv, several published papers and preprints have used
trajectory balance and its generalizations successfully in various applications [32, 14, 8, 18].




                                                   2
2         Preliminaries
2.1       Markovian flows

We give some essential definitions, following §2 of [4]. Fix a directed acyclic graph G = (S, A)
with state space S and action space A. Let s0 ∈ S be the special initial (source) state, the only state
with no incoming edges, and designate vertices with no outgoing edges as terminal (sinks) 1 . We
call the vertices states, the edges actions, the states reachable through outgoing edges from a state its
children, and the sources of its incoming edges its parents.
A complete trajectory is a sequence of transitions τ = (s0 →s1 → . . . →sn ) going from the initial
state s0 to a terminal state sn with (st →st+1 ) ∈ A for all t. Let T be the set of complete trajectories.
A trajectory flow is a nonnegative function F : T →R≥0 . With our water analogy, it could be the
number of water molecules travelling along this path (the units don’t matter because the flow function
can be scaled arbitrarily,  since we normalize them to get probabilities). For any state s, define the
state flow F (s) = s∈τ F (τ ), and, for any edge s→s′ , the edge flow
                    P

                                                     X
                                  F (s→s′ ) =                    F (τ ).                              (1)
                                                  τ =(...→s→s′ →... )

As a consequence of this definition, the flow matching constraint (incoming flow = outgoing flow) is
satisfied for all states s that are not initial or terminal:
                                        X                    X
                            F (s) =             F (s′′ →s) =       F (s→s′ ).                   (2)
                                   (s′′ →s)∈A                    (s→s′ )∈A

A nontrivial (i.e., not identically zero) trajectory flow F determines a distribution P over trajectories,
                                        1                         X
                              P (τ ) = F (τ ), Z = F (s0 ) =          F (τ ).                         (3)
                                        Z
                                                                         τ ∈T

The trajectory flow F is Markovian if there exist action distributions PF (−|s) over the children of
each nonterminal state s such that the distribution P has a factorization
                                                                n
                                                                Y
                              P (τ = (s0 → . . . →sn )) =             PF (st |st−1 ).                 (4)
                                                                t=1

Equivalently ([4], Prop. 3) there are distributions PB (−|s) over the parents of each noninitial state s
such that for any terminal x,
                                                                      n
                                                                      Y
                          P (τ = (s0 → . . . →sn )|sn = x) =                PB (st−1 |st ).           (5)
                                                                      t=1

If F is a Markovian flow, then PF and PB can be computed in terms of state and edge flows:
                                           F (s→s′ )                         F (s→s′ )
                            PF (s′ |s) =             ,       PB (s|s′ ) =              ,              (6)
                                             F (s)                             F (s′ )
supposing denominators do not vanish. We call PF and PB the forward policy and backward policy
corresponding to F , respectively. These relations are summarized by the detailed balance constraint
                                    F (s)PF (s′ |s) = F (s′ )PB (s|s′ ).                              (7)

Uniqueness properties. A Markovian flow is uniquely determined by an edge flow, i.e., a nontrivial
choice of nonnegative value on every edge satisfying the flow matching constraint (2). By Corollary
1 of [4], a Markovian flow is also uniquely determined by either of
• a constant Z = F (s0 ) > 0 and a distribution PF (−|s) over children of every nonterminal state; or
• a nontrivial choice of nonnegative state flows F (x) for every terminal state x and a choice of
  distribution PB (−|s) over parents of every noninitial state.
      1
    [3] allowed terminal states with outgoing edges. The difference is easily overcome by augmenting every
such state x by a new terminal state x⊤ with a stop action x→x⊤ .


                                                         3
2.2       GFlowNets

Suppose that a nontrivial nonnegative reward function R : X → R≥0 is given on the set of terminal
states. GFlowNets [3] aim to approximate a Markovian flow F on G such that
                                     F (x) = R(x) ∀x ∈ X .                                    (8)
We adopt the broad definition that a GFlowNet is any learning algorithm consisting of:
• a model capable of providing the initial state flow Z = F (s0 ) as well as the forward action
  distributions PF (−|s) for any nonterminal state s (and therefore, by the above, uniquely but
  possibly in an implicit way determining a Markovian flow F );
• an objective function, such that if the model is capable of expressing any action distribution and the
  objective function is globally minimized, then the constraint (8) is satisfied for the corresponding
  Markovian flow F .
The forward policy of a GFlowNet can be used to sample trajectories from the corresponding
Markovian flow F by iteratively taking actions according to policy PF (−|s). If the objective function
is globally minimized, then the likelihood of terminating at x is proportional to R(x).
In general, an objective optimizing for (8) cannot be minimized directly because F (x) is a sum over
all trajectories leading to x, and computing it may not be practical. Therefore, two local objectives –
flow matching and detailed balance – have previously been proposed.
Flow matching objective [3]. A model Fθ (s, s′ ) 2 with learnable parameters θ approximates the
edge flows F (s→s′ ). The corresponding forward policy is given by PF (s′ |s; θ) ∝ Fθ (s, s′ ) (Eq.
(6)). Denote the corresponding Markovian flow by Fθ and distribution over trajectories by Pθ . The
parameters are trained to minimize the error in the flow matching constraint (2) for all noninitial and
nonterminal nodes s:                                                    !2
                                                                  ′′
                                               P
                                                  (s′′ →s)∈A Fθ (s , s)
                            LFM (s) = log P                          ′
                                                                                                     (9)
                                                   (s→s′ )∈A Fθ (s, s )
and a similar objective L′FM pushing the inflow at x ∈ X to equal R(x) at terminal nodes x. This
objective is optimized for nonterminal states s and terminal states x from trajectories sampled from a
training policy πθ . Usually, πθ is chosen to be a tempered (higher temperature) version of PF (−|s, θ),
which also helps exploration during training. The parameters are updated with stochastic gradient
                                                  "n−1                       #
                                                    X
                                                                      ′
                         Eτ =(s0 →...→sn )∼πθ ∇θ       LFM (st ) + LFM (sn ) .                     (10)
                                                     t=1
As per Proposition 10 of [4], if the training policy πθ has full support, and a global minimum of the
expected loss (9) over states on trajectories sampled from πθ is reached, then the GFlowNet samples
from the target distribution (i.e., Fθ satisfies (8)).
Detailed balance objective [4]. A neural network model with parameters θ has input s and three
kinds of outputs: an estimated state flow Fθ (s), an estimated distribution over children PF (−|s; θ),
and an estimated distribution over parents PB (−|s; θ). The policy PF (−|−; θ) and the initial state
flow Fθ (s0 ) uniquely determine a Markovian flow Fθ , which is not necessarily compatible with the
estimated backward policy PB (−|−; θ). The error in the detailed balance constraint (7) is optimized
on actions (s→s′ ) between nonterminal nodes seen along trajectories sampled from the training
policy:
                                                                        2
                                                   Fθ (s)PF (s′ |s; θ)
                                            
                                       ′
                              LDB (s, s ) = log                            ,                     (11)
                                                  Fθ (s′ )PB (s|s′ ; θ)
and a similar constraint L′DB (s, x) is optimized at actions leading to terminal nodes. Similarly to
flow matching, the parameters are updated with stochastic gradient
                                          "n−1                                    #
                                           X
                                                                      ′
                    E(s0 →...→sn )∼πθ ∇θ       LDB (st−1 , st ) + LDB (sn−1 , sn )               (12)
                                              t=1
along trajectories sampled from a training policy πθ . By Proposition 6 of [4], a global minimum of
the expected detailed balance loss under a πθ with full support specifies a GFlowNet that samples
from the target distribution, i.e., the flow Fθ satisfies (8).
      2
    In practice, it is convenient and more economical to provide a representation of s to the neural net, which
simultaneously outputs the flows Fθ (s, s′ ) for all s′ that are reachable by an action from s.


                                                      4
Algorithm 1 Training a GFlowNet with trajectory balance
input Reward function R : X → R>0 , model and optimizer hyperparameters
 1: Initialize models PF , PB , Z with parameters θ
 2: repeat
 3:    Sample trajectory τ = (s0 → · · · → sn ) from policy PF (−|−; θ) or a tempered version of it
 4:    θ ← θ − η∇θ LTB (τ ) {gradient update on (14)}
 5: until convergence monitoring on running LTB (τ )



Remarks. In some problems, such as autoregressive sequence generation (§5.3), the directed graph
G is a tree, so each state has only one parent. In this case, PB is trivial and the detailed balance
objective reduces to the flow matching objective, which in turn can be shown to be equivalent to Soft
Q-Learning [12, 5] with temperature α = 1, a uniform qa′ , and γ = 1.


3   Trajectory balance

Let F be a Markovian flow and P the corresponding distribution over complete trajectories, defined
by (3), and let PF and PB be forward and backward policies determined by F . A direct algebraic
manipulation of Eqs. (3,4,5) gives the trajectory balance constraint for any complete trajectory
τ = (s0 →s1 → . . . →sn = x):
                                n
                                Y                              n
                                                               Y
                            Z         PF (st |st−1 ) = F (x)         PB (st−1 |st ),               (13)
                                t=1                            t=1

where we have used that P (sn = x) = F Z(x) .
As explained in §A.2, the trajectory balance constraint (13) and the detailed balance constraint (7) are
special cases of one general constraint, which has been studied as a training objective in [18].
Trajectory balance as an objective. We propose to convert (13) into an objective to be optimized
along trajectories sampled from a training policy. Suppose that a model with parameters θ outputs
estimated forward policy PF (−|s; θ) and backward policy PB (−|s; θ) for states s (just as for detailed
balance above), as well as a global scalar Zθ estimating F (s0 ). The scalar Zθ and forward policy
PF (−|−; θ) uniquely determine an implicit Markovian flow Fθ .
For a trajectory τ = (s0 →s1 → . . . →sn = x), define the trajectory loss
                                              Qn                      2
                                           Zθ t=1 PF (st |st−1 ; θ)
                          LTB (τ ) = log        Qn                        .                        (14)
                                          R(x) t=1 PB (st−1 |st ; θ)

If πθ is a training policy – usually that given by PF (−|−; θ) or a tempered version of it – then the
trajectory loss is updated along trajectories sampled from πθ , i.e., with stochastic gradient
                                             Eτ ∼πθ ∇θ LTB (τ ).                                   (15)
The full algorithm, with batch size of 1, is presented as Algorithm 1 and its correctness is guaranteed
by the following.
Proposition 1. Let R be a positive reward function on X .
(a) If PF (−|−; θ), PB (−|−; θ), and Zθ are the forward and backward policies and normalizing
    constant of a Markovian flow F satisfying (8), then LTB (τ ) = 0 for all complete trajectories τ .
(b) Conversely, suppose that LTB (τ ) = 0 for all complete trajectories τ . Then the corresponding
    Markovian flow Fθ satisfies (8), and PF (−|−; θ) samples proportionally to the reward.

The proof is given in §A.1. In particular, if πθ has full support and Eτ ∼πθ LTB (τ ) is globally
minimized over all forward and backward policies (PF , PB ) and normalizing constants Z, then the
corresponding Markovian flow Fθ satisfies (8) and PF (−|−; θ) samples proportionally to the reward.
(The positivity assumption on R is necessary to avoid division by 0 in (14), but can be relaxed by
introduction of smoothing constants, just as was done for the losses proposed in [3, 4].)


                                                      5
Remarks. (1) As discussed in §2, in the case of auto-regressive generation, G is a directed tree,
where each s ∈ S has a single parent state. In this case PB is trivially PB = 1, ∀s ∈ S. We get
                                                Qn                     2
                                               Zθ t=1 PF (st |st−1 ; θ)
                             LTB (τ ) =    log                                                        (16)
                                                      R(x)

(2) We found it beneficial to parametrize Z in the logarithmic domain (log Z is the trainable parameter)
and output logits for PF (−|s; θ) and PB (−|s; θ), so that all products in (14) become sums under the
logarithm. This is consistent with the log-domain parametrization of flows in [3]. In addition, we
found it helpful to set a higher learning rate for Z than for the parameters of PF and PB .3

3.1   Canonical choice of reward-matching flow

The constraint (8), in general, does not have a unique solution: if the underlying undirected graph of
G has cycles, there may be multiple Markovian flows whose corresponding action policies sample
proportionally to the reward. However, by the uniqueness properties, for any choice of backward
policy PB (−|−), there is a unique flow satisfying (8), and thus a unique corresponding forward
policy PF (−|−) for states with nonzero flow. (See Fig. 1.)
In some settings, it may be beneficial to fix the backward policy PB and train only the parameters
giving PF and Zθ . For example, it may difficult to construct a model that outputs a distribution over
the parents of a given input state (e.g., for the molecule domain (§5.2), it is hard to force invariance
to molecule isomorphism). A natural choice is to set PB (−|s) to be uniform over all the parents of a
state s, i.e., PB (−|s) = 1/#{s′ | (s′ →s) ∈ A}.


4     Related work

Reinforcement learning. GFlowNets are trained to sample proportionally the reward rather than
maximize it as usual in RL. However, on tree-structured DAGs (autoregressive generation) are
equivalent to RL with appropriate entropy regularization or soft Q-learning and control as inference
[5, 12, 13]. The experiments and discussion of [3] show how these methods can fail badly in the
general DAG case well handled by GFlowNets. Signal propagation over sequences of several actions
in trajectory balance is also related to losses used in RL computed on subtrajectories [22].
Local exploration vs. amortized generalization to unseen modes. GFlowNets are also related
to MCMC methods for sampling from unnormalized densities. While there has been work on
accelerating or partially amortizing sampling from unnormalized densities over discrete spaces when
exact sampling is intractable [11, 7], some of it domain- or problem-specific [30], GFlowNets treat
the compositional structure in data as a learning problem (enabling generalization to unseen modes),
not as a bias to build in to the sampler. Thus, the cost is amortized and borne by the learning of that
structure through sampling, not through search at generation time.
Variational inference. GFlowNets are connected with variational methods for fitting hierarchical
generative models. The squared log-ratio loss proposed in [20] as a control variate in the optimization
of an evidence lower bound can be seen as a special case of trajectory balance. See §A.3 for further
discussion, in which we prove that on-policy optimization of trajectory balance is equivalent to
minimization of a certain KL divergence. Two recent papers [31, 19] extend our observations.


5     Experiments

We evaluate the proposed trajectory balance objective against prior objectives for training GFlowNets
as well as standard methods for learning policies that approximately sample objects proportionally
to their rewards, like MCMC as well as against other RL techniques. Our experiments include the
hypergrid and molecule synthesis tasks from [3] and two new tasks in which G is a directed tree.

   3
     Because the loss (14) is quadratic in log Z, gradientQ
                                                          updates on log Z are
                                                                             Qequivalent to setting it to a
weighted moving average of the discrepancy between log PF and log(R(x) PB ). Optimizers enhanced
with momentum complicate things: we leave empirical investigation of these questions to future work.


                                                    6
5.1        Hypergrid environment

In this subsection, we study a synthetic hypergrid environment introduced by [3]. This task is easier
than others we study, but we include it for completeness, and because it allows us to illustrate some
interesting behaviours.4
In this environment, the nonterminal states S ◦ form a D-dimensional hypergrid with side length H:

                      S ◦ = {(s1 , . . . , sD ) | sd ∈ {0, 1, . . . , H − 1}, d = 1, . . . , D},

and actions are operations of incrementing one coordinate in a state by 1 without exiting the grid.
The initial state is (0, . . . , 0). For every nonterminal state s, there is also a termination action that
transitions to a corresponding terminal state s⊤ (cf. footnote 1). The reward at a terminal state
s⊤ = (s1 , . . . , sd )⊤ is given by
                   D                                            D
                                    sd                                 sd
                   Y                                          Y                            
           ⊤
  R(s ) = R0 + 0.5   I                  − 0.5 ∈ (0.25, 0.5] + 2   I        − 0.5 ∈ (0.3, 0.4)
                                   H −1                               H −1
                          d=1                                             d=1

where I is an indicator function and R0 is a constant controlling the difficulty of exploration. This
reward has peaks of height 2.5 + R0 near the corners of the hypergrid, surrounded by plateaux of
height 0.5 + R0 . These plateaux are separated by wide troughs with reward R0 . An illustration with
H = 8 and D = 2 is shown in the left panel of Fig. 1. This environment evaluates the ability of a
GFlowNet to generalize from visited states to infer the existence of yet-unvisited modes.
We train GFlowNets with the detailed balance (DB) and trajectory balance (TB) objectives with
different H, D, and R0 , in addition to reproducing the flow matching (FM) experiments and non-
GFlowNet baselines based upon [3]’s published code. Our GFlowNet policy model is a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) that accepts as input a one-hot encoding of a state s (with the goal of enabling
generalization) and outputs logits of the forward and backward policies PF (−|−; θ) and PB (−|−; θ)
(as well as the estimated state flow Fθ (s) in the case of DB). The forward policy, backward policy,
and state flow models share all but the last weight matrix of the MLP. This is consistent with [3]’s
model, where an identical architecture accepted s as input and output estimated flows Fθ (s, s′ ) for
all children s′ of s. Details are given in §B.1.
We consider a 4-dimensional grid with H = 8 and and a 2-dimensional grid with H = 64. The
two grids have the same number of terminal states, but the 2-dimensional grid has longer expected
trajectory lengths. For both grid sizes, we consider R0 = 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, with smaller R0 giving
environments that are more difficult to explore due to the lower likelihood for models to cross the
low-reward valley. For the models trained with DB and TB, we also explore the effect of fixing the
backward policy to be uniform (§3.1).
Results. In Fig. 2, we plot the evolution over the course of training of the L1 error between the true
reward distribution (the reward R(x) normalized over all possible terminal states x ∈ X ) and the
empirical distribution of the last 2 · 105 visited states for all settings (which would have a probability
of 0 on x’s not visited). Although convergence to the same stable minimum is achieved by all models
and settings, DB and TB training tend to converge faster than FM, with a slight benefit of TB over
detailed balance in the 4-D environment.
Effect of uniform PB . Note the difference in learning speed between models with fixed uniform
backward policy PB and models with learned PB . As noted in §3.1, when PB is fixed, there is a
unique PF (−|−; θ) that globally minimizes the objective, and it may be approached slowly. However,
if PB and PF are permitted to evolve jointly, they may more quickly approach one of the many
optimal solutions. This is confirmed by the much faster convergence of models with learned PB
on the 64 × 64 grid. We have observed that, especially for large grid sizes, when PB and PF are
both learned, the model has a bias towards first taking all actions in one coordinate direction, then
proceeding in the other direction until terminating (as in the right panel of Fig. 1), perhaps because a
constant distribution over two actions (‘continue to the right’ and ‘terminate’) can be modeled with
higher precision over a large portion of the grid than the complex position-dependent distribution as
shown in the centre panel of Fig. 1.

      4
          Code: https://gist.github.com/malkin1729/9a87ce4f19acdc2c24225782a8b81c15.


                                                          7
Figure 1: Left: The reward function on an 8 × 8 grid environment (§5.1) with R0 = 0.1. Centre
and right: Two forward action policies – with fixed uniform PB and with a learned non-uniform
PB – that sample from this reward. The lengths of arrows pointing up and right from each state
are proportional to the likelihoods of the corresponding actions under PF , and the sizes of the red
octagons are proportional to the termination action likelihoods.




Figure 2: Empirical L1 error between true and sampled state distributions on the grid environment
with varying grid size and R0 . Mean and standard error over 5 seeds. The curves for PPO and MCMC
baseline would lie outside the plot bounds.


5.2        Small drug molecule synthesis

Next, we consider the molecule generation task [30, 15, 16, 10, 24] introduced for GFlowNets in [3].
We extend [3]’s published code with an implementation of the TB and DB objectives.5
The goal is to generate molecules, in the form of graphs, with a low binding energy to the 4JNC
inhibitor of the sEH (soluble epoxide hydrolase) protein. The graphs generated are junction trees [15]
of a vocabulary of building blocks. The reward is defined as the normalized negative binding energy as
predicted by a proxy model, itself trained to predict energies computed via docking simulations [26].
The maximum trajectory length is 8, with the number of actions varying between around 100 and
2000 (the larger a molecule, the more possible additions exist), making |X | about 1016 .
Results. We plot in Fig. 3 (left and centre) the correlation of log-reward and log-sampling probability
(the likelihood that a trajectory sampled from the learned policy terminates at x) for GFlowNets
trained using TB, FM and DB. This correlation is significantly higher for models trained with TB.
The points x shown are from a fixed held-out set to which the GFlowNets do not have access in
training. Note that a perfect model would have correlation 1, as log R(x) and log pθ (x) would differ
by a constant (equal to log Z) that is independent of x.
In Fig. 3 (right) we plot the average pairwise Tanimoto similarity [1] for the 1000 highest-reward
samples generated over the course of training. We see that TB consistently generates more diverse
molecules than FM. These results showcase the benefits of TB, not only for faster temporal credit
assignment, but for generalization and diversity. In addition, TB has up to 5× runtime speedup over
FM as the enumeration of parents is not needed. See §B.2 for further discussion.

5.3        Autoregressive sequence generation

Finally, we evaluate the TB objective on the task of autoregressive sequence generation. In §5.3.1,
we study the effect of trajectory length and action space size on the learning dynamics in GFlowNets.
In §5.3.2, we consider the more realistic task of generating peptides (short protein sequences with
anti-microbial properties) and evaluate GFlowNets against standard RL and MCMC baselines.
      5
          Code: https://github.com/GFNOrg/gflownet/tree/trajectory_balance.


                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                    FM




                                               Corr. log p (x) to log R(x)
                                                                             0.8




                                                                                                              Top-1000 Tanimoto sim.
             20                                                                                                                        0.7                          DB
                                                                             0.6                                                                                    TB
             40                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                       0.6
log p (x)
             60                                                              0.2
                                                                             0.0
             80                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                             0.2
            100                  FM r = 0.31                                 0.4
                                 DB r = 0.8
                                 TB r = 0.86                                 0.6                                                       0.4
            120
                     60     40       20    0                                       FM      DB         TB                                 0.0   0.5   1.0      1.5    2.0
                                                                                                                                                                     1e5
                          log R(x)                                                      objective                                              molecules seen
Figure 3: Left, Centre: Pearson correlations between rewards and sampling probability. log pθ (x) is
the log-likelihood that a trajectory sampled from the learned policy PF (−|−; θ) terminates at x. Left:
Scatter plot on a test set of x’s for the best hyperparameters of TB, FM, and DB. Centre: Violin plot
of correlations for 16 hyperparameter settings and 3 seeds for each setting, showing TB being capable
of fitting better. Right: Average pairwise Tanimoto similarity for the top 1000 samples generated by
GFlowNets as training progresses. Lines are the average across runs, shaded regions the standard
deviation. Models trained with TB have consistently lower similarity than those with FM, hence
greater diversity. We hypothesize that the higher variance, in correlation and diversity, of TB relative
to DB is related to high variance of the stochastic gradient; see [18].


5.3.1             Bit sequences
Task. The goal is to generate bit sequences of a fixed length n = 120 (X = {0, 1}n ), where the
reward is designed to have modes at a given fixed set M ⊂ X that is unknown to the learner. The
reward for a sequence x is defined as R(x) = exp(1 − miny∈M d(x, y)/n), where d is the edit
distance. We describe the procedure to generate M in §B.3.
For different integers k dividing n, we design action spaces for left-to-right generation of sequences
in X , where a complete trajectory has nk actions and each action appends a k-bit ‘word’ to the end of
a partial sequence. A forward policy on this state space is the same an autoregressive sequence model
over a vocabulary of size 2k . Varying k while fixing X and M allows us to study the effect of the
tradeoff between trajectory lengths ( nk ) and the action space sizes (|V | = 2k ) without changing the
underlying probabilistic modeling problem.
We compare GFlowNets trained with the TB objective against GFlowNets trained with the FM
objective (equivalent to DB and Soft Q-Learning in this case) and two non-GFlowNet baselines:
A2C with Entropy Regularization [29, 21], Soft Actor-Critic [13, 6] and MARS [30]. We use a
Transformer-based architecture [28] across all the methods. See §B.3 for details.
To evaluate the methods we use (1) Spearman correlation between the probability of generating the
sequence p(x) = F (x)/Z and its reward R(x) on a test set sampled approximately uniformly over
the possible values of the reward, (2) number of modes captured (number of reference sequences
from M for which a candidate within a distance δ has been generated). In our experiments, n = 120,
|M | = 60, k ∈ {1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10}, and δ = 28.
Results. Fig. 4 (left) presents the results for the Spearman correlation evaluation. We observe that
GFlowNets trained with the TB objective learn policies that correlate best with the reward R(x)
across all action spaces. In particular, we observe the effect of inefficient credit assignment in
GFlowNets trained with FM, as the correlation improves with increasing k, i.e., shorter trajectories.
On the other hand, large action spaces also hurt GFlowNets trained with the FM objective, while
the TB objective is robust to them. Additionally, we can observe in Fig. 4 (right) that for fixed k,
GFlowNets trained with TB discover more modes faster than other methods.

5.3.2             Anti-Microbial Peptide (AMP) generation Table 1: Results on the AMP generation task.
                                                                                                                                       Top 100 Reward      Top 100 Diversity
In this section, we consider the practical task of gen-
                                                                                                    GFN-LTB                            0.85 ± 0.03         18.35 ±1.65
erating peptide sequences that have anti-microbial                                                  GFN-LFM /LDB                       0.78 ± 0.05         12.61 ± 1.32
activity. The goal is to generate a protein sequence                                                SAC                                0.80 ± 0.01         8.36 ± 1.44
(where the vocabulary consists of 20 amino acids and                                                AAC-ER                             0.79 ± 0.02         7.32 ± 0.76
                                                                                                    MCMC                               0.75 ± 0.02         12.56 ± 1.45

                                                                                          9
                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                         GFN - Trajectory Balance                                   GFN - Trajectory Balance
                                  0.7                                                                    GFN - Flow Matching                                        GFN - Flow Matching
                                                                                                      20 A2C - Entropy                                              A2C - Entropy




    Spearman Correlation (p, r)
                                  0.6
                                                                                                         Soft Actor-Critic                                          Soft Actor-Critic




                                                                                    Number of Modes
                                  0.5                                                                    MCMC                                                       MCMC
                                                                                                      15
                                  0.4
                                                                                                      10
                                  0.3

                                  0.2                                                                  5
                                  0.1
                                                                                                       0
                                  0.0
                                        2      4              6            8   10                          0        10000       20000       30000   40000   50000
                                            Number of Bits in Action Space                                                        Training Steps



Figure 4: Left: Spearman correlation of the sampling probability under different learned policies
and reward on a test set, plotted against the number of bits k in the symbols in V in the bit sequence
generation task. GFlowNets trained with trajectory balance learn policies that have the highest
correlation with the reward R(x) and are robust to length and vocabulary size. Right: Number
of modes discovered over the course of training on the bit sequence generation task with k = 1.
GFlowNets trained with trajectory balance discover more modes faster.


a special end-of-sequence action), with maximum length 60. We take 6438 known AMP sequences
and 9522 non-AMP sequences from the DBAASP database [23]. We then train a classifier on this
dataset, using 20% of the data as a validation set. The probability output by this model for a sequence
to be classified as an AMP is used as the reward R(x) in our experiments.
The state and actions are designed just as in the previous experiment, with each action appending
a symbol to the right of a state. We again compare TB and FM, as well as A2C with entropy
regularization, SAC and MCMC as baselines. We again use Transformers for all the experiments on
this task; see further details in Appendix B.4. We generate 2048 sequences from each method, and
pick the top 100 sequences ranked by their reward R(x). As metrics, we use the mean reward for
these 100 sequences and the average pairwise edit distance among them as a measure of diversity.
Results. We present the results in Table 1, where we observe that GFlowNets trained with TB
outperform all baselines on both performance and diversity metrics.

6                                 Discussion and conclusion
We introduced a novel training loss for GFlowNets, trajectory balance (TB), which yields faster and
better training than the previously proposed flow matching (FM) and detailed balance (DB) losses. We
proved that this objective, when minimized, yields the desired GFlowNet property of sampling from
the target distribution specified by an unnormalized reward function. This new loss was motivated
by the observation that the FM and DB losses are local in the action sequence and may require
many iterations for credit assignment to propagate to early actions: if a gradient update introduces a
flow inconsistency at some state far from the initial state (such as when a novel high-reward state is
sampled), the parent of this state must be visited before the update is propagated closer to the root,
akin to the slow propagation of reward signals in temporal difference learning.
We empirically found that TB discovered more modes of the energy function faster and was more
robust than FM and DB to the exponential growth of the state space, due in part to the lengths
of sequences and in part to the size of the action space. A factor to consider when interpreting
our experimental results is that because we use a neural net rather than a tabular representation of
policies, the early states’ transitions are informed by downstream credit assignment via parameter
sharing. Early states also get many more visits because there are more possible states near the
ends of sequences than near the initial state. Finally, TB trades off the advantage of immediately
providing credit to early states with the disadvantage of relying on sampling of long trajectories and
thus a potentially higher variance of the stochastic gradient. The high gradient variance is a possible
limitation of TB in difficult environments, and ways to overcome it by interpolating between local
and trajectory-level objectives have been studied in subsequent work [18].
All in all, we found that trajectory balance is a superior training objective in a broad set of experiments,
making it the default choice for future work on GFlowNets.



                                                                                                                10
Acknowledgments
This research was enabled in part by computational resources provided by Compute Canada. All
authors are funded by their primary academic institution. We also acknowledge funding from CIFAR,
Samsung, IBM, Microsoft, and the Banting Postdoctoral Fellowship.
The authors are grateful to all the members of the Mila GFlowNet group, in particular to Dinghuai
Zhang, for many fruitful research discussions, as well as to Yiheng Zhu for feedback on the published
code. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments.

References
 [1] Bender, A. and Glen, R. C. Molecular similarity: a key technique in molecular informatics.
     Organic & biomolecular chemistry, 2(22):3204–3218, 2004.
 [2] Bengio, E., Pineau, J., and Precup, D. Interference and generalization in temporal difference
     learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.
 [3] Bengio, E., Jain, M., Korablyov, M., Precup, D., and Bengio, Y. Flow network based generative
     models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS), 2021.
 [4] Bengio, Y., Lahlou, S., Deleu, T., Hu, E., Tiwari, M., and Bengio, E. GFlowNet foundations.
     arXiv preprint 2111.09266, 2021.
 [5] Buesing, L., Heess, N., and Weber, T. Approximate inference in discrete distributions with
     Monte Carlo tree search and value functions. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
     2019.
 [6] Christodoulou, P. Soft actor-critic for discrete action settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07207,
     2019.
 [7] Dai, H., Singh, R., Dai, B., Sutton, C., and Schuurmans, D. Learning discrete energy-based mod-
     els via auxiliary-variable local exploration. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
     2020.
 [8] Deleu, T., Góis, A., Emezue, C., Rankawat, M., Lacoste-Julien, S., Bauer, S., and Bengio, Y.
     Bayesian structure learning with generative flow networks. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence
     (UAI), 2022.
 [9] Ford, L. R. and Fulkerson, D. R. Maximal flow through a network. Canadian Journal of
     Mathematics, 8:243–248, 1956.
[10] Gilmer, J., Schoenholz, S. S., Riley, P. F., Vinyals, O., and Dahl, G. E. Neural message passing
     for quantum chemistry. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
[11] Grathwohl, W., Swersky, K., Hashemi, M., Duvenaud, D. K., and Maddison, C. J. Oops I took
     a gradient: Scalable sampling for discrete distributions. International Conference on Machine
     Learning (ICML), 2021.
[12] Haarnoja, T., Tang, H., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Reinforcement learning with deep energy-
     based policies. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
[13] Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum
     entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. International Conference on
     Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
[14] Jain, M., Bengio, E., Hernandez-Garcia, A., Rector-Brooks, J., Dossou, B. F., Ekbote, C., Fu,
     J., Zhang, T., Kilgour, M., Zhang, D., Simine, L., Das, P., and Bengio, Y. Biological sequence
     design with GFlowNets. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
[15] Jin, W., Barzilay, R., and Jaakkola, T. Chapter 11. junction tree variational autoencoder for
     molecular graph generation. Drug Discovery, pp. 228–249, 2020. ISSN 2041-3211.


                                                 11
[16] Kumar, A., Voet, A., and Zhang, K. Fragment based drug design: from experimental to
     computational approaches. Current medicinal chemistry, 19(30):5128–5147, 2012.

[17] Kumar, A., Agarwal, R., Ghosh, D., and Levine, S. Implicit under-parameterization inhibits data-
     efficient deep reinforcement learning. International Conference on Learning Representations
     (ICLR), 2021.

[18] Madan, K., Rector-Brooks, J., Korablyov, M., Bengio, E., Jain, M., Nica, A., Bosc, T., Bengio,
     Y., and Malkin, N. Learning GFlowNets from partial episodes for improved convergence and
     stability. arXiv preprint 2209.12782, 2022.

[19] Malkin, N., Lahlou, S., Deleu, T., Ji, X., Hu, E., Everett, K., Zhang, D., and Bengio, Y.
     GFlowNets and variational inference. arXiv preprint 2210.00580, 2022.

[20] Mnih, A. and Gregor, K. Neural variational inference and learning in belief networks. Interna-
     tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2014.

[21] Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and
     Kavukcuoglu, K. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. International
     Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.

[22] Nachum, O., Norouzi, M., Xu, K., and Schuurmans, D. Bridging the gap between value and
     policy based reinforcement learning. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

[23] Pirtskhalava, M., Amstrong, A. A., Grigolava, M., Chubinidze, M., Alimbarashvili, E., Vish-
     nepolsky, B., Gabrielian, A., Rosenthal, A., Hurt, D. E., and Tartakovsky, M. Dbaasp v3:
     Database of antimicrobial/cytotoxic activity and structure of peptides as a resource for develop-
     ment of new therapeutics. Nucleic Acids Research, 49(D1):D288–D297, 2021.

[24] Shi, Y., Huang, Z., Feng, S., Zhong, H., Wang, W., and Sun, Y. Masked label prediction: Unified
     message passing model for semi-supervised classification. International Joint Conference on
     Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2021.

[25] Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT Press, 2018.

[26] Trott, O. and Olson, A. J. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with
     a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of computational
     chemistry, 31(2):455–461, 2010.

[27] van Hasselt, H., Doron, Y., Strub, F., Hessel, M., Sonnerat, N., and Modayil, J. Deep reinforce-
     ment learning and the deadly triad. arXiv preprint 1812.02648, 2018.

[28] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and
     Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
     2017.

[29] Williams, R. J. and Peng, J. Function optimization using connectionist reinforcement learning
     algorithms. Connection Science, 3(3):241–268, 1991.

[30] Xie, Y., Shi, C., Zhou, H., Yang, Y., Zhang, W., Yu, Y., and Li, L. MARS: Markov molecular
     sampling for multi-objective drug discovery. International Conference on Learning Representa-
     tions (ICLR), 2021.

[31] Zhang, D., Chen, R. T. Q., Malkin, N., , and Bengio, Y. Unifying generative models with
     GFlowNets. arXiv preprint 2209.02606, 2022.

[32] Zhang, D., Malkin, N., Liu, Z., Volokhova, A., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. Generative flow
     networks for discrete probabilistic modeling. International Conference on Machine Learning
     (ICML), 2022.


                                                 12
Checklist
    1. For all authors...
        (a) Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
            contributions and scope? [Yes]
        (b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes] This is mainly a paper about
            theory and algorithms. Future work that applies these algorithms, in particular for
            domains where they can most immediately have an impact (e.g., molecule design for
            drug discovery), should consider the limitations and negative societal impacts of these
            applications.
        (c) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [N/A] See
            previous.
        (d) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
            them? [Yes]
    2. If you are including theoretical results...
        (a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [Yes]
        (b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [Yes] See §A.1.
    3. If you ran experiments...
        (a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experi-
            mental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes] For the grid
            and molecule environments. [No] For the other environments.
        (b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
            were chosen)? [Yes] See the Appendix.
        (c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
            ments multiple times)? [Yes] See the Appendix.
        (d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
            of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes] See the Appendix.
    4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
        (a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [Yes] See the relevant
            experiment sections.
        (b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [N/A]
        (c) Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [N/A]
            References to the molecule and AMP sequence data are provided.
        (d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
            using/curating? [N/A] No new data collection was done.
        (e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identifiable
            information or offensive content? [N/A] Not relevant for the domains studied.
    5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
        (a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
            applicable? [N/A]
        (b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review
            Board (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [N/A]
        (c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
            spent on participant compensation? [N/A]




                                                13
A     Theoretical appendix
A.1   Proof of Proposition 1

Recall Proposition 1:
Proposition. Let R be a positive reward function on X .
(a) If PF (−|−; θ), PB (−|−; θ), and Zθ are the forward and backward policies and normalizing
    constant of a Markovian flow F satisfying (8), then LTB (τ ) = 0 for all complete trajectories τ .
(b) Conversely, suppose that LTB (τ ) = 0 for all complete trajectories τ . Then the corresponding
    Markovian flow Fθ satisfies (8), and PF (−|−; θ) samples proportionally to the reward.

Proof. Part (a) is an elementary manipulation of the trajectory balance constraint (13), with R(x)
substituted for F (x) by the reward matching assumption (8).
Conversely, if LTB (τ ) = 0 for all complete trajectories τ = (s0 → → · · · → sn = x), then the
policies PF (−|−; θ) and PB (−|−; θ) satisfy the constraint
                               n
                               Y                                      n
                                                                      Y
                           Z         PF (st |st−1 ; θ) = R(x)               PB (st−1 |st ; θ).                       (17)
                               t=1                                    t=1

Let x be a terminal state. By iterating the law of total probability, we have
                                            X                 n
                                                              Y
                                                                   PB (st−1 |st ; θ) = 1.                            (18)
                               τ =(s0 →s1 →...→sn =x) t=1

(Each term in this sum is the conditional likelihood of τ conditioned on terminating at sn = x under
the the Markovian flow Fθ′ uniquely determined by setting terminal state flows Fθ′ (x) = R(x) and
backward policy PB (−|−; θ), cf. the uniqueness properties.)
On the other hand, we have
                      X
      Fθ (x) =                         Fθ (τ )                                      (by definition of state flows)
                  τ =(s0 →...→sn )=x
                         X                  n
                                            Y
              =                         Z         PF (st |st−1 ; θ)                                      (by (4))
                  τ =(x0 →...→sn )=x        t=1

                         X                        n
                                                  Y
              =                         R(x)            PB (st−1 |st ; θ)                               (by (17))
                  τ =(x0 →...→sn )=x              t=1

              = R(x)                                                                                   (by (18)).
We conclude that Fθ satisfies (8), as desired.
(We remark that one can show in a similar way that Fθ (s→s′ ) = Fθ′ (s→s′ ) for all actions (s→s′ ) ∈
A, and thus, by the uniqueness properties, Fθ = Fθ′ , i.e., the forward and backward policies determine
the same Markovian flow.)

A.2   Generalizations

The trajectory balance constraint (13) can be generalized to partial (not complete) trajectories, i.e.,
those that do not start at s0 and end in a terminal state. Generalizations such as those we present here
could be useful for a future goal of modularized or hierarchical GFlowNets, where each module (or
low-level GFlowNet) can apply them to just the subsequences they have access to (cf. §9.4 and §10.2
in [4]).
Subtrajectory balance. If τ = (sm →sm+1 → . . . →sn ) is a partial trajectory (i.e., (st →st+1 ) ∈ A
for all t), then, for any Markovian flow F with forward and backward policies PF and PB ,
                                  n−1
                                  Y                                         n−1
                                                                            Y
                        F (sm )         PF (st+1 | st ) = F (sn )                 PB (st | st+1 ).                   (19)
                                  t=m                                       t=m


                                                              14
This can be derived by showing that both sides are equal to
                                            X
                                                                                 F (τ ).                                   (20)
                                          τ =(...→sm →sm+1 →...→sn →... )∈T

The trajectory balance constraint (13) is the special case of this for full trajectories, while the detailed
balance constraint (7) is the special case of trajectories wth only one edge. This subtrajectory balance
constraint can be converted into a learning objective: a model can output estimated state flows Fθ (s)
only for certain nonterminal states s (“hubs"), and the error in (19) optimized along segments of
trajectories between these hubs. Thus the detailed balance loss corresponds to all nodes being hubs,
and the trajectory balance loss corresponds to only the initial state s0 being a hub.
Subtrajectory balance has been explored and was shown to have convergence benefits in a work that
appeared while this paper was under review [18].
Non-forward trajectories. Trajectory balance has a more general form for trajectories that have a
mix of forward and backward steps. Here we describe just one example: terminal-terminal paths that
take several backward steps, then take several forward steps.
Let s1 = s′1 be any state (not necessarily a child of the GFlowNet’s initial state s0 ) and
(s1 →s2 → . . . →sn ) and (s′1 →s′2 → . . . →s′n′ ) two trajectories from s0 to terminal states. Then
the following must hold for any Markovian flow F :
               ′                                                                                    ′
              nY −1                       n−1
                                          Y                                n−1
                                                                           Y                       nY −1
   R(s′n′ )           PB (s′t | s′t+1 )         PF (st+1 | st ) = R(sn )         PB (st | st+1 )           PF (s′t+1 | s′t ).
              t=1                         t=1                              t=1                     t=1
                                                                                                   (21)
That is, the path that goes “backward, then forward” from sn to s′n′ must have the same likelihood no
matter in which direction it is traversed, up to the ratio of rewards at the endpoints. A simple way to
derive (21) is by writing the trajectory balance constraint for two paths from the GFlowNet’s initial
state to sn and s′n′ that are identical until s1 and then diverge, then dividing one constraint by the
other. Notice that the flow F (s1 ) is not present here. Thus, (21) can be converted into an learning
objective does not require a model to output any state flows (even the initial state flow Z).
Such terminal-terminal paths could also be used for exploration of X with MCMC-like local search
algorithms [32]. The special case of ‘one step back, two steps forward’ paths was used for a graph
generation problem in Bayesian structure learning [8].

A.3   GFlowNets and variational methods

We build a connection between the TB loss for GFlowNets and a naïve variational approach to fitting
sequential samplers.
Suppose
    P that the backward policy PB is fixed, and suppose for ease of the derivation that it is known
that x∈X R(x) = 1. As in the main text, we write PB (τ |x) for the likelihood of obtaining the
reverse of the trajectory tau when sampling from the backward policy starting from x.
The on-policy trajectory balance objective has gradient with respect to the parameters of PF :
             "                      2 #                                                       
                       R(x)PB (τ |x)                             R(x)PB (τ |x)
 E(τ,x)∼PF ∇θ log                          = E(τ,x)∼PF −2 log                   ∇θ log PF (τ ; θ) ,
                          PF (τ ; θ)                                PF (τ ; θ)
                                                                                                 (22)
which is estimated by sampling τ ∼ PF (terminating in x ∈ X ) and computing the term inside the
expectation.
The model PF could also be optimized with respect to an evidence lower bound (ELBO) objective,
i.e., minimizing DKL (PF (τ )∥R(x)PB (τ |x)). We derive the gradient of this KL:
              ∇θ DKL (PF (τ ; θ)∥R(x)PB (τ |x))                                                                            (23)
                                                
                                      PF (τ )
              = ∇θ E(τ,x)∼PF log
                                   R(x)PB (τ |x)
                                                                                      
                                      PF (τ ; θ)          PF (τ ; θ)
              = E(τ,x)∼PF ∇θ log                  + log               ∇θ log PF (τ ; θ) .                                  (24)
                                    R(x)PB (τ |x)       R(x)PB (τ |x)


                                                              15
The last step is the standard score function trick, and the Reinforce estimator optimizes the KL by
sampling τ ∼ PF (τ ; θ) and using the term inside the expectation as the direction of the gradient step.
But now notice that
                                                
                                     PF (τ ; θ)
              E(τ,x)∼PF ∇θ log                      = E(τ,x)∼PF [∇θ log PF (τ ; θ)] = 0,           (25)
                                  R(x)PB (τ |x)
because of the constraint τ PF (τ ; θ) = 1. We conclude that the expected trajectory balance
                            P
gradient (22) is equal to the expected Reinforce gradient (24) up to a constant.
However in the vicinity of the optimum (when TB and KL equal 0), the TB graident estimator has
lower variance, as the following computation shows:
                                                      
                             p(x)
       Var(τ,x)∼PF log                ∇θ log PF (τ ; θ)
                           PF (τ ; θ)
                                                                                       
                                      PF (τ ; θ)           PF (τ ; θ)
        − Var(τ,x)∼PF ∇θ log                      + log                ∇θ log PF (τ ; θ)
                                   R(x)PB (τ |x)         R(x)PB (τ |x)
                                                                                        
                                                            ⊤              R(x)PB (τ |x)
        = −E(τ,x)∼PF (∇θ log PF (τ ; θ)∇θ log PF (τ ; θ) ) 1 + 2 log                         .
                                                                              PF (τ ; θ)
If the term in parentheses is always positive (in particular, in the neighbourhood of the solution where
PF (τ ) = R(x)PB (τ |x) for all τ ), then the difference of variances for all directional derivatives is
negative for all θ.
The connection between GFlowNets and variational methods was more thoroughly explored in two
papers that appeared while this work was under review [31, 19].

B     Experimental appendix
B.1   Hypergrid

For the GFlowNet policy model, we use an MLP of the same architecture as [3], with 2 hidden layers
of 256 hidden units each. We train all models with a learning rate of 0.001 (PF and PB policy model)
and 0.1 (Zθ ) with up to 106 sampled trajectories with a batch size of 16, using the Adam optimizer
with all other parameters at their default values.
To reproduce the flow matching and non-GFlowNet baselines, we used the code published by [3] out
of the box. For TB and DB, we used a learning rate of 10−3 for the flow and policy models and a
10−1 for the initial state flow log Z = log F (s0 ). (In a search of learning rates over powers of 10,
10−3 was found to be the largest that does not lead to instability in the form of rapid mode collapse.)
All experiments with TB and DB were performed on CPU and take about 2 hours for 106 episodes
on a single core, totaling ∼10 CPU days for all 24 DB and TB experiment settings with 5 seeds each:
{TB, DB} × {uniform PB , learned PB } × {R0 = 10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3 } × {(H, d) = (8, 4), (64, 2)}.

B.2   Molecule synthesis

We use the dataset and proxy model provided by [3]. We also train GFlowNet using the same
architecture and hyperparameters (except β and learning rate) but using the trajectory balance loss
presented in this paper, using fixed uniform backward policy PB . The binding scores in the provided
dataset were computed with AutoDock [26].
To test hyperparameter robustness we trained models using reward exponents β = {4, 8, 10, 16}, and
learning rates {5 × 10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 }. In contrast to [3], we used a more exploratory
training policy: with probability 0.1 (instead of the original 0.05) trajectories are set to stop at some
length k, which is chosen uniformly between 3 and 8, the minimum and maximum allowed trajectory
length respectively.
We observed a runtime improvement of up to 5× for TB relative to FM. There are three factors
responsible for this:
(1) Most importantly, FM requires as many model evaluations as there are parents of all states in a
    sampled trajectory, since the model gives the out-flows F (s→s′ ) for an input state s, while the


                                                   16
    objective involves a sum over in-flows. On the other hand, TB and DB require just one evaluation
    of the forward and backward policy models per state.
(2) The average trajectory length. If a model learns to terminate early with higher frequency,
    trajectories are shorter and fewer model evaluations are required.
(3) Hardware and the ratio of CPU and GPU load. Experiments on the molecule domain were run on
    a Tesla K80 GPU; the computation time benefit of TB appears to be smaller but still present on
    newer hardware with identical batch size settings. (Meanwhile, experiments on the lightweight
    grid domain were run on CPU, and the trajectory length was the main factor controlling runtime.)

B.3     Bit sequence generation

Generating reference sequences. Let H be a set of symbols (short bit sequences of length
b), for instance H = {0110, 1100, 1111, 0000, 0011}. Sequences in S are then constructed
by randomly combining m symbols from H, for instance, 0011110000000011 where m = 4.
This construction imposes a structure on R(x). In our experiments we set m = nb , b = 8,
H = {′ 00000000′ ,′ 11111111′ ,′ 11110000′ ,′ 00001111′ ,′ 00111100′ }.
Generating the test set. Since the reward is defined based on the edit distance from the sequences in
set M , we generate a test set sampled approximately uniformly over the possible values of R(x) as
follows: (1) pick a mode s ∈ M , (2) modify i bits randomly ∀i < n and we repeat this for all the
modes.
Implementation. We implement GFlowNets with TB and FM in PyTorch6 for autoregressive
generation tasks, along with the A2C baseline. For the MARS (MCMC) baseline we modify the
implementation released by [3].
Hyperparameters. We use a Transformer [28] as the neural network architecture for all the methods.
We use 3 hidden layers with hidden dimension 64 with 8 attention heads. All methods were trained
for 50, 000 iterations, with a minibatch size of 16. We set the the random action probability to 0.0005
selected from {0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.01}, the reward exponent β to 3 selected from {2, 3, 4}, and
the sampling temperature for PF to 1 for the GFlowNets. For trajectory balance we use a learning
rate of 1 × 10−4 selected from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 } for the policy parameters
and 1 × 10−3 for log Z. For flow matching we use a learning rate of 5 × 10−4 selected from
{10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 } with leaf loss coefficient λT = 10. For A2C with entropy
regularization we share parameters between the actor and critic networks, and use learning rate of
10−4 selected from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 } with entropy regularization coefficient
10−3 selected from {10−4 , 10−3 , 10−2 }. For SAC we use the formulation in [6] with a learning rate
of 5 × 10−4 selected from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 } target network update frequency
500 and 200 initial random steps. For the MARS baseline we set the learning rate to 5×10−4 selected
from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 }. For all the methods we use the Adam optimizer.
Overall, for the Bit sequence generation experiments we used 25 GPU days.

B.4     AMP generation

Vocabulary. The vocabulary of the 20 amino acids is defined as: [‘A’, ‘C’, ‘D’, ‘E’, ‘F’,
‘G’, ‘H’, ‘I’, ‘K’, ‘L’, ‘M’, ‘N’, ‘P’, ‘Q’, ‘R’, ‘S’, ‘T’, ‘V’, ‘W’, ‘Y’]
Reward Model. We use a Transformer-based classifier, with 4 hidden layers, hidden dimension 64,
and 8 attention heads. We train it with a minibatch of size 256, with learning rate 10−4 , with early
stopping on the validation set.
Hyperparameters. As with the bit sequences, we use a Transformer [28] as the neural network archi-
tecture for all the methods. We use 3 hidden layers with hidden dimension 64 with 8 attention heads.
All method were trained for 20, 000 iterations, with a mini batch size of 16. We set the the random ac-
tion probability to 0.01 selected from {0.0001, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.01}, the reward exponent β : R(x)β
to 3 selected from {2, 3, 4}, and the sampling temperature for PF to 1 for the GFlowNets. For trajec-
tory balance we use a learning rate of 5×10−3 selected from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5×10−4 , 10−3 , 5×10−3 }
for the flow parameters and 1 × 10−2 for log Z. For flow matching we use a learning rate of 5 × 10−4
selected from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 } with leaf loss coefficient λT = 25. For
A2C with entropy regularization we share parameters between the actor and critic networks, and
   6
       Code: https://gist.github.com/MJ10/59bfcc8bce4b5fce9c1c38a81b1105ae.


                                                  17
use learning rate of 5 × 10−4 selected from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 } with entropy
regularization coefficient 10−2 selected from {10−4 , 10−3 , 10−2 }. For SAC we use the formulation
in [6] with a learning rate of 5 × 10−4 selected from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 } target
network update frequency 400 and 200 initial random steps. For the MARS baseline we set the learn-
ing rate to 5 × 10−4 selected from {10−5 , 10−4 , 5 × 10−4 , 10−3 , 5 × 10−3 }. We run the experiments
on 3 seeds and report the mean and standard error over the three runs in Table 1. Overall, for the
AMP Generation experiments we used 14 GPU days.




                                                  18
